Path rewriting for `setenv:` and `build-env:` (#5636)
ocaml/opam: doc/pages/Manual.md

`FOO += ""`, `FOO := ""`, etc. are all ignored - i.e. opam never adds empty segments to an existing variable.

#### Environment update portability
<a id="env-update-rewrite"></a>

Some fields define an environment update portability specification. In the opam
file it is the [`x-env-path-rewrite:`](#opamfield-x-env-path-rewrite) in the
form:

```BNF
<environement-rewrites> ::= { <environement-rewrite> }*
<environement-rewrite>  ::= <ident> <bool>
                          | <ident> <separator-formula> <format-formula>

<separator-formula>     ::= <separator-formula> <logop> <separator-formula>
                          | ( <separator-formula> )
                          | <separator> { { <distrib-formula> }* }
<format-formula>        ::= <format-formula> <logop> <format-formula>
                          | ( <format-formula> )

>                           | <format> { { <distrib-formula> }* }

Reviewer: As far as i could see, only `separator-formula = <separator>` and `format-formula = <format>` can be shown in the tests. I think it would be nice to have the other syntaxes tested for completeness.

Author: added

`FOO += ""`, `FOO := ""`, etc. are all ignored - i.e. opam never adds empty segments to an existing variable.

#### Environment update portability
<a id="env-update-rewrite"></a>

Some fields define an environment update portability specification. In the opam

> file it is the [`x-env-path-rewrite:`](#opamfield-x-env-path-rewrite) in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
file it is the [`x-env-path-rewrite:`](#opamfield-x-env-path-rewrite) field, of the
```

<path-format-formula>   ::= <path-format-formula> "|" <path-format-formula>
                          | ( <path-format-formula> )
                          | <path-format> { { <distrib-formula> }* }

<separator>             ::= (") ":" (") | (") ";" (")
<path-format>           ::= (") "host" (") | (") "host-quoted" (") | (") "target" (") | (") "target-quoted" (")

<distrib-formula>       ::= <distrib-formula> <logop> <distrib-formula>
                          | "!" <distrib-formula>
                          | "(" <distrib-formula> ")"
<logop>                 ::= "&" | "|"
```

The `<separator>` defines the path separator to use for the variable.
The `<path-format>` defines the way to handle variables path formatting:
- host: use the *host* interpretation of PATHs (i.e. convert via `cygpath` on
  Windows).
- host-quoted: use the *host* interpretation of entries and double-quote any
  entries which include the separator character.
- target: use the *target* interpretation of entries (i.e. rewrite slashes to
  backslashes on Windows).
- target-quoted: use the *target* interpretation of entries and double-quote
  any entries which include the separator character.

> Default separator is `";" | ";" { os = "win32"}` (`;` on Windows, `:` on Cygwin

Author: cf [comment](https://github.com/ocaml/opam/pull/5636/files#r1389505791)

> Default separator is `";" | ";" { os = "win32"}` (`;` on Windows, `:` on Cygwin
> or any other system) and default format is `target` with no slashes rewrite.

Author: ```suggestion
If a variable is not mentioned in `x-env-path-rewrite`, the separator is assumed to be `;` on Windows and `:` on all other systems; no slash or quoting transformations are performed. There is two special default cases:
* `PKG_CONFIG_PATH` uses `:` separator and is `target-quoted`
* `PATH` on Windows uses `;` separator and is `target-quoted`
```

Reviewer 2: Looks nice - highly pedantically "There _are_ two special default cases"

> or any other system) and default format is `target` with no slashes rewrite.

Reviewer: The wording is a bit confusing. Reading the definition for `target` above, it feels pointless to say the default format is `target` if it’s not going to do anything.
Does that actually do nothing or is there something to say for variables? In which case it might be worth being more explicit.

Author: `target` not explicitly specified is a no-op indeed. I've worded it like that because in the code the default is `target` with no rewrite. Maybe not worth keep it in that way in the doc.

Author: Should we add a word on specific case ? `PKG_CONFIG_PATH` (`:`, `target-quoted`) and `PATH` on windows (`;`, `target_quoted`)?

Reviewer: > Maybe not worth keep it in that way in the doc.

I think so. In my opinion documentations should aim to provide a pointer to behaviours of a system as far removed from the code as possible.

> Should we add a word on specific case ?

sure!

Author: cf https://github.com/ocaml/opam/pull/5636/files#r1389505791

For example, on Windows:
- `[FOO false]`: `FOO` won't be translated nor rewritten, and default separator is used if needed
- `[FOO true]`: `FOO` is rewritten using defaults `;` and `target` with slash rewriting
  - `FOO = "a:/path/to"` -> FOO=a:\path\to

> - `[FOO ":" "target-quoted"]: `FOO` will be append using `:` separator, if the added path contains '/' they are transformed into `\`, and if the added path contains a `:`, it will be quoted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `[FOO ":" "target-quoted"]: `FOO` will be appended using `:` separator, if the added path contains '/' they are transformed into `\`, and if the added path contains a `:`, the added path will be quoted
```

  - `FOO += "a/path/to"` -> FOO=a\path\to:R:\previous\path
  - `FOO += "a:path/to"` -> FOO="a:path\to":R:\previous\path

> - `[FOO ";" "target-quoted"]: `FOO` will be append using `;` separator, if the added path contains '/' they are transformed into `\`, and if the added path contains a `;`, it will be quoted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `[FOO ";" "target-quoted"]: `FOO` will be appended using `;` separator, if the added path contains '/' they are transformed into `\`, and if the added path contains a `;`, the added path will be quoted
```

> - `[FOO ";" "target-quoted"]: `FOO` will be appended using `;` separator, if the added path contains '/' they are transformed into `\`, and if the added path contains a `;`, the added path will be quoted
>   - `FOO += "a/path/to"` -> FOO=a\path\to;R:\previous\path
>   - `FOO += "a;path/to"` -> FOO="a;path\to";R:\previous\path

Author: ```suggestion
```

> - `[FOO ":" "target-quoted"]: `FOO` will be appended using `:` separator, if the added path contains '/' they are transformed into `\`, and if the added path contains a `:`, the added path will be quoted
>   - `FOO += "a/path/to"` -> FOO=a\path\to:R:\previous\path
>   - `FOO += "a:path/to"` -> FOO="a:path\to":R:\previous\path
> - `[FOO ";" "target-quoted"]: `FOO` will be appended using `;` separator, if the added path contains '/' they are transformed into `\`, and if the added path contains a `;`, the added path will be quoted
>   - `FOO += "a/path/to"` -> FOO=a\path\to;R:\previous\path
>   - `FOO += "a;path/to"` -> FOO="a;path\to";R:\previous\path

Author: ```suggestion
- `[FOO ":" "target-quoted"]: `FOO` will be appended using `:` separator, if the added path contains '/' they are transformed into `\`, and if the added path contains a `:`, the added path will be quoted
  - `FOO += "a/path/to"` -> FOO=a\path\to:R:\previous\path
  - `FOO += "a:path/to"` -> FOO="a:path\to":R:\previous\path
```

> - `[FOO ":" "host"]: `FOO` will be appended using `:`, and its path will be translated according to the host translator, on Windows:

Author: ```suggestion
- `[FOO ":" "host"]: `FOO` will be appended using `:`, and its path will be translated according to the host translator, i.e `cygpath <path>`:
```

>   - `FOO += "A:\path\to"` -> FOO=/cygdrive/a/path/to:/previous/path

Reviewer: I’m unsure what’s a host translator though

       has changed. Even then, this won't unpin any packages that would have
       been removed from `pin-depends:`.

> - <a id="opamfield-x-env-path-rewrite">`x-env-path-rewrite: [ <environmenet-update-rewwrite> ... ]`</a>:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- <a id="opamfield-x-env-path-rewrite">`x-env-path-rewrite: [ <environment-update-rewrite> ... ]`</a>:
```

>   a specific extra field, used to specify if environment variables defined in
>   [`setenv:`](#opamfield-setenv) and [`build-env`](#opamfield-build-env)
>   rewrite rules. See [`environment update portability`](#env-update-rewrite)
>   for syntax.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  a specific extra field, used to specify rewrite rules for environment variables
  defined in [`setenv:`](#opamfield-setenv) and [`build-env`](#opamfield-build-env).
  See [`environment update portability`](#env-update-rewrite) for syntax.
```
